The aim of this book is to inspire a better politics:
one that will enable future generations to be happier, with goals of greater well-being and better health,
rather than wealth maximization. Happiness does not
mean being ecstatic: it is the avoidance of misery, the
gaining of long-term life satisfaction, the feeling of fulfilment, of worth, of kindness, of usefulness and of love.
We need new measures of what matters most to us.
The book is also about ‘the collective good’. We cannot truly be happy if those around us are not happy.
Not just our family and friends, but our fellow citizens,
whose lives are entwined with ours and will affect us
for good or ill at some point. This book looks at evidence and suggests policies that take account of that
evidence. We live in an information-rich, ‘scientific’ 
2
A BETTER POLITICS
This low-resolution PDF is licensed under a Creative Commons License and
may be passed on electronically for free. It must not be copied for sale.
world, but this is a recent phenomenon. Yet while we
might not fully understand climate change or subatomic physics, we should now find it easier to understand what makes us happy; and we can also compare
ourselves with other nations on key measures of health
and well-being.
Politicians often say that they are addressing the
issues that matter most to people. But they rely on opinion surveys in which the questions have been predetermined. What have people themselves said, unprompted,
about what is most important to them or their family?
How do their answers relate to how happy and healthy
those same people are?
Being happy is not the be-all and end-all, but it’s better
to be happier if you can. Politicians often promise that
if they are elected they will ensure that the electorate
will be ‘better off’ than if the other lot are elected; but
do politicians actually know what it is that makes people
happy? Other academics have approached this question
in many very different ways.4
This book begins with statistical evidence from a
scientific paper. Yet although almost all of the facts presented in these pages are referenced, it is not a researchbased volume. Instead, this book is a collection of ideas
– based mostly on the work of others, including much
readily available evidence – on what policies could best
safeguard us (better than current policies) from what
the evidence indicates harms us the most.
3
Introduction
This low-resolution PDF is licensed under a Creative Commons License and
may be passed on electronically for free. It must not be copied for sale.
Both a paperback version and high-resolution and fully interactive ebook versions
of this book are available to buy direct from the publisher at http://bit.ly/1oGOx9m
Before going any further, why might you want to
consider the arguments and evidence presented in this
book? One reason is that, while it isn’t exactly a new
phenomenon, inequality in our society is getting worse
– particularly when we look at the growing gap between
the very wealthy and the rest, including those with least.
This matters because it appears that growing inequality
can make it harder to enact the policies that could most
improve our happiness.
When it was first observed that despite rising average
material wealth, people were not happier than their parents had been, researchers in economics – not in psychology, sociology or politics – began to ask why. Recently,
many economists have pointed out that old economic
growth models, those used by both the left and the right,
were failing.5
 The new models concern findings that could
not have been made a generation ago, because then it
was true that well-being was generally increased by having more material goods. A generation ago, what people
needed above all else was a good enough home to live in
and the means to be able to keep it warm. A generation or
so before that, most people in the UK did not have spare
clothes, or enough money to eat well most of the time. In
our generation, many of us eat too much. Most people,
although far from all, now have enough.
Recent research has shown that now, living in a country
with higher levels of well-organized collective spending
produces a happier population; and that when countries 
4
A BETTER POLITICS
This low-resolution PDF is licensed under a Creative Commons License and
may be passed on electronically for free. It must not be copied for sale.
are compared, public policies such as social insurance and
employment protection are among the most important
factors in predicting well-being among citizens. This
may come as a surprise if you think that being taxed as
little as possible is what gives people the most economic
freedom and leads to them enjoying ‘life, liberty and the
pursuit of happiness’ to the fullest. It is worth reflecting
that Thomas Jefferson wrote those famous words into
the American Constitution. Many believe that he took
inspiration for this from John Locke, who had written, in
his ‘Essay concerning human understanding’, that ‘The
highest perfection of intellectual nature lies in a careful
and constant pursuit of true and solid happiness.’
Economist Benjamin Radcliff summarized his research
findings on this for an American audience:
The differences in your feeling of well-being living in
a Scandinavian country (where welfare programs are
large) versus the US are going to be larger than the
individual factors in your life. The political differences
trump all the individual things you’re supposed to do
to make yourself happier – to have fulfilling personal
relationships, to have a job, to have more income. The
political factors swamp all those individual factors.
Countries with high levels of gross domestic product
consumed by government have higher levels of personal satisfaction.6
Radcliff is correct about the correlations when happiness is measured carefully,7
 but of course people do 
5
Introduction
This low-resolution PDF is licensed under a Creative Commons License and
may be passed on electronically for free. It must not be copied for sale.
Both a paperback version and high-resolution and fully interactive ebook versions
of this book are available to buy direct from the publisher at http://bit.ly/1oGOx9m
not wake up each day and check how much their government spends and feel happier if taxation and public
spending is higher. Living in better-organized (and often
higher-taxing) countries makes leading our personal
lives easier, allows us to get on with our families, and
with other people more widely. (Although there are
also societies where overall taxation is lower but where
income inequality is lower and well-being is higher than
in the UK.8
)
Until recently, economists’ models have maximized
what they call ‘utility’: the satisfaction achieved from
the consumption of a good or service given individual
preferences. However, a growing number of economists
have, in the last twenty years, started looking at happiness instead.9
 Before the 2008 crash, some leading economists began arguing that there were things that were
much more important to life and well-being than money.
For example, Ann Pettifor10 and Anastasia Nesvetailova11
foresaw the turmoil to come in 2008 and argued that
there was a need for new understanding in economics.
That new understanding should include a better appreciation of happiness.
Alois Stutzer and Bruno Frey have recently shown
that people in more consumerist societies are likely to
overestimate how much enjoyment they will gain from
the goods they consume, and they discount the harm
working too many hours and commuting too much
will cause them. As Stutzer and Frey put it, ‘suboptimal 
6
A BETTER POLITICS
This low-resolution PDF is licensed under a Creative Commons License and
may be passed on electronically for free. It must not be copied for sale.
choices result’.12 Even more recently, John Helliwell has
shown that environmental sustainability depends on
well-being:
If people really are happier working together for a
worthy purpose, this exposes a multitude of win–win
solutions to material problems, thereby building community while meeting material needs.13
This new thinking has wide-reaching implications. It has
emerged because we are so much better off, in material
ways, than our parents were – and yet no happier.
As happiness economics is based on relating wellbeing to other life events, economists Gus O’Donnell
and Andrew Oswald have recently explained that the
new economic research has:
one strength that may not be completely recognized
by all economists. People are not asked how much one
thing makes them happy compared to another. Deeply
complicated cause-and-effect survey questions are
thereby largely eschewed, and that is an advantage.14
You do not ask people what they think makes them
happy, but instead observe how their levels of happiness
change and try to associate that with other changes in
their lives at that time.
This book is heavily influenced by happiness economics, but I am not an economist and so it also uses a wider
range of sources from the social sciences, humanities 
7
Introduction
This low-resolution PDF is licensed under a Creative Commons License and
may be passed on electronically for free. It must not be copied for sale.
Both a paperback version and high-resolution and fully interactive ebook versions
of this book are available to buy direct from the publisher at http://bit.ly/1oGOx9m
and sciences, and includes many examples from current
affairs. To present consistent evidence, results from
a single survey of happiness are referred to, but it is
important to recognize the much wider context to this
work. Many recent studies point in similar directions. The
sense that it is time we measured success differently is
infectious. On 28 June 2012, the General Assembly of the
United Nations agreed to pass resolution A/RES/66/281,
which states that:
The General Assembly, … Conscious that the pursuit of
happiness is a fundamental human goal, … Recognizing also the need for a more inclusive, equitable and
balanced approach to economic growth that promotes
sustainable development, poverty eradication, happiness and the well-being of all peoples, decides to proclaim 20 March the International Day of Happiness.15
Thomas Jefferson might have approved.
So what does promote happiness? To try to answer
this question, in 2006 a colleague and I investigated some
data about what is most important to people, and how
that might relate to their health and happiness. More
recent work by others suggests that what we found a
decade ago continues to hold true.16 In Britain, a large
household panel study has been conducted annually for
the past twenty-five years. In four of those years (September 1992 to December 1995) an unusual question was
added. It was unusual because to answer this question, 
8
A BETTER POLITICS
This low-resolution PDF is licensed under a Creative Commons License and
may be passed on electronically for free. It must not be copied for sale.
you had to write in an answer. Here is the question. Try
it yourself in relation to the most recent twelve months:
It is a straightforward question. So please record
your responses, but don’t feel bad if you don’t have four.
Up to four responses can be recorded.
1. .......................................................................................
2. .......................................................................................
3. .......................................................................................
4. ......................................................................................
Over ten years later I remain shocked by the responses
people gave. It is fair to say that this question was asked
at the end of a very long interview-style survey. Perhaps
many people were simply sick of answering questions.
Maybe they thought that some of the answers they had
already given covered everything that mattered. Nevertheless, a large and representative sample of the population answered, so it is worth considering carefully what
they said.
State in your own words what in the last year has
happened to you (or your family) which stood out as
important.
9
I